Flood Modeling and Simulation with Flood Sensor Data and Machine Learning for New York City.
Mentor: Dr. Zhanyang Zhang (Computer Science Department - CSI)
Description: New York City is increasingly vulnerable to floods from extreme weather and rising sea levels. Many coastal neighborhoods suffer from high tide flooding monthly that is destroying infrastructure and property value.  In 2021, hurricanes Henri and Ida struck NYC within weeks of each other with unprecedented levels of rainfall that caused deaths and damages. As part of a citywide study, we focus on developing a local compound flooding (rains & storm surge) model and simulation with machine leaning using multi-model weather and flood sensors. As part of NYC FloodNet initiative, we have deployed a handful flood sensors and gateways on Staten Island.  Our project integrates simulation model and machine learning to take advantage of huge amount data from multi-model data sources to improve the model’s accordance.
To model floods we need to consider many physical inputs and parameters, such as rainfalls, meteorological conditions, storms, elevations, land uses, ground infiltration and sewers, just to name a few.  A model is like a system.  It takes input data, then it computes the output results based on certain mathematics and physics theories using the values assigned to the system parameters.  Due to measurement errors or, in case of difficult to measure parameters, we have to estimate the values for the parameters; the model often produces results that do not match reality accurately. 
Research objectives: Our project objective is to improve flood model accordance. It involves, (1) develop and deploy a networked flood sensor to collect flood data from many key locations over time, (2) use machine learning algorithms to train the model with large quantities of flood data.  Eventually, the model will adjust the parameters to improve the outcomes. Our major data sources include NYC FloodNet, NYC Open Data Project and NYS MesoNet.  CSI has an unique advantage that it has the MesoNet weather station and FloodNet Gateway as well as FloodNet Sensors deployed on campus.  Conduct simulation study in numeric solutions with large volume sensor data is computation intensive.  CUNY’s HPCC computing resources are critical to the project.
What the students will learn: Student will learn how to collect FloodNet data from flood sensor node, gateway to Internet cloud storage and data representations. Flood data are inherently scares and noise. Student will learn how to process and clearing the data with Kalman filters and other statistical methods. Finally, students will conduct experiments with machine learning algorithms to train the flood model for better performance.  We will use an existing flood model, SWMM, developed by US EPA and widely used in the field.
Student’s required background: The applicants must show proficiency in programming using C++, Python, and/or MATLab. A successfully completed formal course in Data Structures/Algorithms and Probability and Statistics is preferable.